[FLINK-22373][docs] Add Flink 1.13 release notes (#15687)
apache/flink: docs/content.zh/release-notes/flink-1.13.md

state backend.

#### FailureRateRestartBackoffTimeStrategy allows one less restart than configured

##### [FLINK-20752](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-20752)

The Failure Rate Restart Strategy was allowing 1 less restart per interval than configured. Users
wishing to keep the current behavior should reduce the maximum number of allowed failures per
interval by 1.

#### Support rescaling for Unaligned Checkpoints

##### [FLINK-17979](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-17979)

While recovering from unaligned checkpoints, users can now change the parallelism of the job. This
change allows users to quickly upscale the job under backpressure.

### SQL

#### Officially deprecate the legacy planner

##### [FLINK-21709](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-21709)

The old planner of the Table & SQL API is deprecated and will be dropped in Flink 1.14. This means
that both the BatchTableEnvironment and DataSet API interop are reaching end of life. Use the
unified TableEnvironment for batch and stream processing with the new planner, or the DataStream API
in batch execution mode.

> #### Disable problematic cast conversion between NUMERIC type and TIMESTAMP type
> 
> ##### [FLINK-21698](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-21698)
> 
> The CAST operation between `NUMERIC` type and `TIMESTAMP` type is problematic and is disabled now,
> e.g.
> `CAST(numeric AS TIMESTAMP(3))` is disabled and should use `TO_TIMESTAMP(FROM_UNIXTIME(numeric))`
> instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Use TIMESTAMP_LTZ as return type for function PROCTIME()

#### [FLINK-21714](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-21714)

Before Flink 1.13, the function return type of `PROCTIME()` is `TIMESTAMP`, and the return value is the `TIMESTAMP` in UTC time zone,
e.g. the wall-clock shows `2021-03-01 12:00:00` at Shanghai, however the `PROCTIME()` displays `2021-03-01 04:00:00` which is wrong.
Flink 1.13 fixes this issue and uses `TIMESTAMP_LTZ` type as return type of `PROCTIME()`, users don't need to deal time zone problems anymore.

#### Support defining event time attribute on TIMESTAMP_LTZ column

#### [FLINK-20387](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-20387)

Support defining event time attribute on TIMESTAMP_LTZ column, base on this, Flink SQL gracefully support the Daylight Saving Time. 

#### Correct function CURRENT_TIMESTAMP/CURRENT_TIME/CURRENT_DATE/LOCALTIME/LOCALTIMESTAMP/NOW()

##### [FLINK-21713](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-21713)

The value of time function CURRENT_TIMESTAMP and NOW() are corrected from UTC time with `TIMESTAMP` type to epoch time with `TIMESTAMP_LTZ` type. Time function LOCALTIME, LOCALTIMESTAMP, CURRENT_DATE, CURRENT_TIME, CURRENT_TIMESTAMP and NOW() are corrected from evaluates for per record in batch mode to evaluate once at query-start for batch job.

#### Disable problematic cast conversion between NUMERIC type and TIMESTAMP type

##### [FLINK-21698](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-21698)

The CAST operation between `NUMERIC` type and `TIMESTAMP` type is problematic and is disabled now,
e.g.
`CAST(numeric AS TIMESTAMP(3))` is disabled and should use `TO_TIMESTAMP(FROM_UNIXTIME(numeric))`
instead.
```

would be better if we can add these incompatibility note here, @dawidwys

Author: We will add them here, if you add them to the corresponding issue.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Support start SQL Client with an initialization SQL file

##### [FLINK-20320](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-20320)

The `sql-client-defaults.yaml` YAML file is deprecated and not provided in the release package. To be compatible, it's still supported to initialize the SQL Client with the YAML file if manually provided. But it's recommned to use the new introduced `-i` startup option to execute an initialization SQL file to setup the SQL Client session. The so-called initialization SQL file can use Flink DDLs to define available catalogs, table sources and sinks, user-defined functions, and other properties required for execution and deployment. The support of legacy SQL Client YAML file will be totally dropped in Flink 1.14.
```

would be better if we can add these incompatibility note here.

#### Support USE MODULES syntax

##### [FLINK-21298](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-21298)

The term MODULES is a reserved keyword now. Use backticks to escape column names and other
identifiers with this name.

#### Update TableResult.collect()/TableResult.print() to the new type system

##### [FLINK-20613](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-20613)

> `Table.execute().collect()` might return slightly different results for column types and row kind.

Reviewer 3: Do we know the mapping between old and new types? This could be an interesting information for the user.

Author: @wuchong @twalthr Could you help me with the answer?

Reviewer 4: The most important differences include:
- Structured types are represented as POJOs of the original class and not `Row` anymore.
- Raw types are serialized according to the configuration in `TableConfig`.

Author: I updated the release notes for the issue.

`RowUtils.USE_LEGACY_TO_STRING` for the local JVM. However, relying on the row's string
representation for tests is not a good idea in general as field data types are not verified.

### Runtime

#### BoundedOneInput.endInput is called when taking synchronous savepoint

##### [FLINK-21132](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-21132)

`endInput()` is not called anymore (on BoundedOneInput and BoundedMultiInput) when the job is
stopping with savepoint.

#### Remove JobManagerOptions.SCHEDULING_STRATEGY

##### [FLINK-20591](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-20591)

The configuration parameter `jobmanager.scheduler.scheduling-strategy` has been removed, because
the `legacy` scheduler has been removed from Flink 1.13.0.

#### Warn user if System.exit() is called in user code

##### [FLINK-15156](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-15156)

A new configuration value `cluster.intercept-user-system-exit` allows to log a warning, or throw an
exception if user code calls `System.exit()`.

This feature is not covering all locations in Flink where user code is executed. It just adds the

> infrastructure for such an interception.

Reviewer 3: Can we specify which locations are currently covered @rmetzger?

> This feature is not covering all locations in Flink where user code is executed. It just adds the
> infrastructure for such an interception.

Reviewer 5: There is no exhaustive list of locations which are not covered. Somebody needs to carefully look into this and make sure that all cases are covered.
This work is tracked in https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-21307. I propose we just link the ticket here in the release notes?

```suggestion
This feature is not covering all locations in Flink where user code is executed. It just adds the
infrastructure for such an interception. We are tracking this improvement in [FLINK-21307](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-21307)
```

I'll ping the AWS guys again to complete this feature.

with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
software distributed under the License is distributed on an
"AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations
under the License.
-->

# Release Notes - Flink 1.13

These release notes discuss important aspects, such as configuration, behavior, or dependencies,
that changed between Flink 1.12 and Flink 1.13. Please read these notes carefully if you are
planning to upgrade your Flink version to 1.13.

### Failover

#### Remove `state.backend.async` option.

##### [FLINK-21935](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-21935)

The `state.backend.async` option is deprecated. Snapshots are always asynchronous now (as they were
by default before) and there is no option to configure a synchronous snapshot any more.

The constructors of `FsStateBackend` and `MemoryStateBackend` that take a flag for sync/async
snapshots are kept for API compatibility, but the flags are ignored now.

> #### Unify Binary format for Keyed State savepoints

Reviewer 6: Is there a pattern to which words are capitalized and which aren't? This doesn't seem to be title-case, and "Binary" doesn't sound like a proper noun to me either.

##### [FLINK-20976](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-20976)

Flink’s savepoint binary format is unified across all state backends. That means you can take a
savepoint with one state backend and then restore it using another.

> If you want to switch the state backend you should first upgrade your Flink version to 1.13 then

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
If you want to switch the state backend you should first upgrade your Flink version to 1.13, then
```

take a savepoint with the new version, and only after that, you can restore it with a different
state backend.

#### FailureRateRestartBackoffTimeStrategy allows one less restart than configured

##### [FLINK-20752](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-20752)

> The Failure Rate Restart Strategy was allowing 1 less restart per interval as configured. Users

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The Failure Rate Restart Strategy was allowing 1 less restart per interval than configured. Users
```

wishing to keep the current behavior should reduce the maximum number of allowed failures per
interval by 1.

#### Unaligned checkpoint recovery may lead to corrupted data stream

##### [FLINK-20654](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-20654)

> Using unaligned checkpoints in Flink 1.12.0 combined with two/multiple inputs tasks or with union

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Using unaligned checkpoints in Flink 1.12.0 combined with two/multiple input tasks or with union
```

change allows users to quickly upscale the job under backpressure.

### SQL

#### Officially deprecate the legacy planner

##### [FLINK-21709](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-21709)

The old planner of the Table & SQL API is deprecated and will be dropped in Flink 1.14. This means
that both the BatchTableEnvironment and DataSet API interop are reaching end of life. Use the
unified TableEnvironment for batch and stream processing with the new planner, or the DataStream API
in batch execution mode.

#### Disable problematic cast conversion between NUMERIC type and TIMESTAMP type

##### [FLINK-21698](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-21698)

The CAST operation between `NUMERIC` type and `TIMESTAMP` type is problematic and is disabled now,
e.g.
`CAST(numeric AS TIMESTAMP(3))` is disabled and should use `TO_TIMESTAMP(FROM_UNIXTIME(numeric))`
instead.

#### Support 'USE MODULES' syntax

##### [FLINK-21298](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-21298)

The term MODULES is a reserved keyword now. Use backticks to escape column names and other
identifiers with this name.

> #### Update `TableResult.collect()/TableResult.print()` to the new type system

Reviewer 6: The usage of inline code blocks seems a bit inconsistent, e.g. here it is put into inline code, but in most other places it isn't.

##### [FLINK-20613](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-20613)

`Table.execute().collect()` might return slightly different results for column types and row kind.

#### Update the Row.toString method

##### [FLINK-18090](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-18090)

> The Row.toSting method has been reworked. This is an incompatible change. If the legacy

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The `Row.toString()` method has been reworked. This is an incompatible change. If the legacy
```

##### [FLINK-15156](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-15156)

A new configuration value `cluster.intercept-user-system-exit` allows to log a warning, or throw an
exception if user code calls `System.exit()`.

This feature is not covering all locations in Flink where user code is executed. It just adds the
infrastructure for such an interception.

### Docker

#### Consider removing automatic configuration fo number of slots from docker

##### [FLINK-21036](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-21036)

The docker images no longer set the default number of taskmanager slots to the number of CPU cores.
This behavior was inconsistent with all other deployment methods and ignored any limits on the CPU
usage set via docker.

#### Rework jemalloc switch to use an environment variable

##### [FLINK-21034](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-21034)

The docker switch for disabling the jemalloc memory allocator has been reworked from a script
argument to an environment variable called DISABLE_JEMALLOC. If set to "true" jemalloc will not be
enabled.

### Connectors

#### Remove swift FS filesystem

##### [FLINK-21819](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-21819)

> The Swift FileSystem is no longer being actively developed and has been removed from the project and

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The Swift filesystem is no longer being actively developed and has been removed from the project and
```

distribution.

### Monitoring & debugging

#### Introduce latency tracking state

##### [FLINK-21736](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-21736)

State access latency metrics are introduced to track all kinds of keyed state access to help debug

> state performance. This feature is not enabled by default and could be turned on once
> setting `state.backend.latency-track.keyed-state-enabled` as true.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
state performance. This feature is not enabled by default and can be turned on by
setting `state.backend.latency-track.keyed-state-enabled` to true.
```

> #### Support for CPU FlameGraphs in new web UI

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
#### Support for CPU flame graphs in new web UI
```

Assuming "FlameGraph" isn't a proper noun for some reason.

> #### Support for CPU FlameGraphs in new web UI

Reviewer 6: Is there really a whole new web UI? That'd seem more noteworthy than a specific feature within it.

Author: The titles are extracted from JIRA issues, I suppose back when the issue was created we had two UIs at the same time.

##### [FLINK-13550](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-13550)

> Flink now offers Flamegraphs for each node in the job graph. Please enable this experimental feature

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Flink now offers flame graphs for each node in the job graph. Please enable this experimental feature
```

##### [FLINK-20510](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-20510)

The Log4j support for updating the Log4j configuration at runtime has been enabled by default. The
configuration files are checked for changes every 30 seconds.

#### ZooKeeper quorum fails to start due to missing log4j library

##### [FLINK-20404](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-20404)

The Zookeeper scripts in the Flink distribution have been modified to disable the Log4j JMX
integration due to an incompatibility between Zookeeper 3.4 and Log4j 2. To re-enable this feature,
remove the line in the `zookeeper.sh` file that sets `zookeeper.jmx.log4j.disable`.

#### Expose stage of task initialization

##### [FLINK-17012](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-17012)

Task's RUNNING state was split into two states: INITIALIZING and RUNNING. Task is INITIALIZING while
state is initialising and in case of unaligned checkpoints, until all the in-flight data has been
recovered.

### Deployment

#### Officially deprecate Mesos support

##### [FLINK-22352](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-22352)

The community decided to deprecate the Apache Mesos support for Apache Flink. It is subject to

> removal in the future. Users are encourage to switch to a different resource manager.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
removal in the future. Users are encouraged to switch to a different resource manager.
```
